Consensus
It is not possible yet to advise exactly what might be an appropriate mechanism for dealing with the interaction of Indexing scores within a utility decision making valuation mechanism under an EEF looks like in practice or what results it would give for historic and theoretical scenarios. That detailed work would come once the main theory is more solid and workable.
The axioms contain basic propositions about the need for a Sapients consensus engine that will lead to the transfer of information and recommendations for voting.. 
I envisage that when any major decision needs to be made that could impact the other non-human life-forms, or humans or the environment etc then the structure would need to be implemented to seek Consensus. 
When speaking of decisions this includes continuing to do anything we are currently doing such as our treatment of animals for food, reduction of forests and habitats and our infrastructure commitments and decisions. After all, deciding to do nothing is a decision.
From a practical constitutional perspective the more serious the issue the greater degree of consensus is required e.g. 99% to change, add or remove a Law, 95% for an Axiom, >75% and up to 95% when making decisions of usefulness/lawfulness (depending on the seriousness).
Proposed organisational structure:
Decentralised Foundation (DAO)
Guardian layer (standing Guardians/Trustee roles) = select NGOs, scientists, initiators of the EEF
Executive Layer = day to day responsibilities
Project specific layer (temporary sub committees with specific tasks - can be tasked by Executive or Guardians)
Proposal layer  (Scientific community only + Guardians)
Consensus layer - (Final Consensus): all willing participants, i.e. Sapients, without qualification or restriction can vote equally
No direct governmental participation but some participants will have affiliations.
The issues Earth currently faces with its political and legislative structures and bodies are beyond the scope of this essay. There is an extraordinary democratic deficit that has been building up for many years in some western countries (e.g. USA, UK) and areas (EU) and other countries may have very limited forms of ‘free’ political participation. It is unlikely that those with political control will wish to give it up and yet we have need for globally distributed consensus on many matters, not least biodiversity and protection of the biosphere.
So whilst we wait for political structures and alliances to re-align to the needs of our species and others, in the meantime, there is nothing to prevent a ground up approach by the scientific community and concerned citizens using decentralised governance and voting mechanisms (evolving in the blockchain communities) - that operates outside of the current political framework but which is then communicated to the political and governmental bodies. 
If enough people get involved eventually someone in power will have to listen or eventually power will move away from them.

